once around planet Venus, the Earth's
sister
planet. Well, this is what it looks like
through an amateur telescope. This is a
photo that I took showing the cresant
phase of Venus. It's usually very, very
bright when it's visible, either as the
evening star just after sunset or the
morning star just before dawn. Of
course, it's not a star. It's a planet.
Those are just descriptions that were
given to it. But it will look like an
incredibly bright star just with the
eye. You need binoculars or a telescope,
preferably to see it as anything other
than a point of light. When you do that,
really all that you get to see is the
how shiny the cloud tops are and the
various phases present half 3/4 that it
shows to us as we and it journey around
the sun. Of course, Venus is the second
rock from the sun. Mercury, Venus,
Earth, Mars making up the four planets
of the inner solar system.
And if we look at those in comparison to
each other, Mercury is very small. Mars
is a little bigger, but also quite small
compared to the big two, which are Venus
and the Earth. And of course, we've got
the moon there as well, just for
comparison. But Venus and the Earth are
very nearly the same size. Venus is just
a little bit smaller than our Earth.
It's incredibly round, very, very
spherical. And we'll come back to what
that means in a moment. But for now,
being that close to the
sun,
0.7 astronomical units, so 70% of the
Earth's sun distance, you get double the
heat. Um, the amount of heat you receive
goes down according to the inverse
square law. So 1 over 0.7^ squared.
Well, that's two if you work it out. You
can use your
calculators. So, all that we get to see
of Venus is the amazing cloud tops as
shown in those photographs unless we use
radar. And radar can penetrate down
through the clouds, reach the surface,
reflect back, and give us a map like
this one. This is the surface of Venus
as illustrated according to height. So
blue are the lowlying regions. Then the
green and yellow and the red and white
are the absolute peaks. And what you see
is a very strange landscape indeed. We
don't have the same large continents and
uh huge oceans as basins that we have on
the earth. If you were to try to do the
same thing, what you have is a lot of
smaller regions where the ground rises
towards the center effectively large
mountain ranges dotted around
independently but with all kinds of
other strange linear features going on
on the surface there as well.
Now the atmosphere that blocks our view
is 100 times as thick as our own mostly
carbon dioxide something like 95% CO2
and because of that it traps vast
amounts of heat carbon dioxide on the
earth keeps us from freezing and too
much of it would be bad
but on Venus that 100fold increase in
atmospheric pressure and not 400 parts
per million but
95% CO2 traps the vast majority of the
heat that comes from the sun which is of
course twice as powerful at that
distance. As a result the surface
temperature on Venus is over
450° centigrade.
Now that incredibly thick air and the
very slow rotation of Venus, which is an
important factor in controlling a lot
about what goes on in terms of the
planetary
conditions, results in the weather
forecasts being incredibly boring. The
weather is always the
same. The planet is not tilted. It's
axis is largely uh up and down, north
and south at right angles to the orbit.
So you don't get even seasons. The
temperature is just the same all the
time. The thick air moving fairly slowly
but carrying a lot of momentum because
of the uh density and a lot of uh heat
can be distributed by that movement of
the air around spreads the temperature
out over the entire surface. So, it's
pretty much the same all the time. And
that permanent cloud cover always means
that the view from the surface, if you
could get there, would be this dimly lit
orangey red glow everywhere. Now, as
shown in this photograph, there are a
few impact craters that you can see with
the radar images, but they're all large
impact craters. There are no small ones.
And that makes sense because no small
object is going to have the energy and
momentum to penetrate the atmosphere and
make it to the ground. So only large
bides manage to get right through and
form a
crater. In addition to the high
temperature and high pressure, it's a
thoroughly nasty place. It rains battery
acid, but actually the battery acid
never makes it to the ground. sulfuric
acid in the
clouds rain out as droplets, but then as
they make their way downwards under
gravity, the heat from that incredibly
hot surface boils them away before they
make it to the ground. So you have a a
rain zone, but it never actually reaches
the lower part of the atmosphere. And
there have been reports of snow. In
1995, the Muelan probe took this
photograph and revealed shiny substances
on the mountaintops. They appear to form
by ga uh rising clouds of gas bringing
material up that then cools, condenses,
and falls out on the high peaks just
like snow. And a number of possibilities
were suggested including the element
to even lead or bismouth sulfide. And in
fact, Professor Bruce Figgley and Laura
Schaefer were able to show eventually
that it is the sulfides of lead and
bismouth falling out on the surface. So
th so thoroughly nasty. Uh it's
scorching hot. It rains battery acid and
it snows heavy
metals. Now what we can see with the
radar images is that there are over
1,600 volcanoes and we think they might
be extinct. is possibly still going a
little bit but probably extinct. Shield
type volcanoes like Hawaii where mantle
plumes have brought heat to the surface
and no sign of the strat volcanoes, the
ash volcanoes that we have on Earth that
are caused by tectonic plates and
seawater being subducted down underneath
and then boiled back up again. That
process just cannot occur on Venus
because there aren't any
oceans. A few probes have made it to the
surface, just a few of the Russian
probes in fact, and being able to take a
number of photographs. There's a couple
of examples at the top there from Veneer
13, which were able to photograph
itself, its own camera lens, and uh a
little bit of the surface. But it's such
a hostile environment, it's incredibly
difficult to get to. Of course, it
probably wasn't always like that. Way
back in the past, every chance that when
Venus formed, it had a very similar
environment to our own. Um, the water
delivery mechanisms that delivered the
water to Earth would undoubtedly have
delivered it to Venus as well. And so,
it was probably a warm, wet planet. But
that extra proximity to the sun and the
slow rotation of the planet, which is
why it's so perfectly round, as I
mentioned at the beginning, are a clue
to the fact
that it lost its dynamo. No magnetic
shields because the slow rotation does
not whip up a an intense magnetic field.
And so the solar wind is able to rip
into the planet into the atmosphere,
tear the water molecules apart, and then
the hydrogen is light enough to escape
out to space, especially at the higher
temperatures that you have there. And
temperature is important because the
temperature is a measure of the average
kinetic energy of the molecules. And
kinetic energy is a half the mass times
the square of the velocity. So light
molecules move faster at the same
temperature because the mass of them is
lower and so a half mv squared the mass
is lower the v^ squ term has to go up.
So hydrogen being the lightest moves the
fastest and if you increase the
temperature that increases the speed of
all the
molecules and the result is that at
these temperatures the escape velocity
of hydrogen is less than the uh average
velocity of a hydrogen molecule in the
upper atmosphere of Venus. So it would
get ripped away and escape not fall back
again. On Earth escape velocity is about
the same but the temperature is lower
and therefore you have the same problem.
On Mars less gravity so again you were
able to lose hydrogen despite the lower
temperature. Uh that's a very important
feature of the Earth is that it's just
the right
size. So I hope you've enjoyed that.
I'll leave you with this photograph
again, a radar image down, but this time
colorized to that dull orange color
showing the amazing structures and some
of those weird linear features that seem
to be lava flows along the surface where
the volcanoes have been uh erupting.
Now, I say we don't know if they're
still active. Now, it's probable that a
lot of that carbon dioxide was brought
to the surface and a lot of the sulfur
to make the battery acid rain by
volcanoes. And then because there are no
oceans to dissolve that back and deposit
it back and recycle it like we have on
the earth, things turned out very
different indeed. Thanks for listening.